BBC Microcomputer
Disc Filing System User Guide
Addendum 1
This addendum details the differences between the Acorn 1770 Disc Filing System (DFS) and DFS 1.20 as described in the Disc Filing System User Guide Issue 2.
General
The Acorn 1770 DFS (DFS 2.10) is designed to be compatible with the Acorn DFS version 1.20 (and earlier versions). DES 2.10 works with a 1770 disc controller whereas DES 1.20 operates with an 8271 disc controller-. Programs/ROMs which directly access an 8271 disc controller will not work with a DFS 2.10 disc system. Most discs that work with DFS 1.20 will work with DES 2.10, obvious exceptions being protected discs which employ direct access of the 8271 disc controller.
DFS 2.10 uses the same commands as DFS 1.20, but some commands have been slightly modifed, as detailed below. There is no utilities disc with DFS 2.10 -- the *FORM <40/80> and *VERIFY utilities which are disc-based with DFS 1.20 are filing system commands with DFS 2.10; references to a utilities disc which occur within the user guide should be ignored. DFS 2.10 contains several new commands which are not present in DFS 1.20 - see below.
Throughout this text references to ROM (read only memory) should be understood to include any non--volatile memory device with ROM compatible connections and access time, such as a 2764, 27128 or 27256 EPROM with 250ns access time.
DFS 2.10—only commands
*CLOSE Purpose
Closes all sequential files. All disc file data held in RAM output buffers will be copied to the disc. *CLOSE has the same effect as the CLOSE#0 in BASIC.
Example
*CLOSE
Notes
The minimum abbreviation for *CLOSE is *CL. .
March 1985 0403 700 Issue 2 Addendum 1 (0403 703) 1
*EX (<dir>) Purpose
To display information about the specified directory. The information is displayed across the screen (in hexadecimal) in the following order (reading from left to right): <directory name>.<file name>, protection attribute, load address, execution address, length in bytes, start sector number.
Examples •EX $
might give
$.!BOOT L FF1900 FF8023 $.MENU L FF1900 FF1900
•EX D
might give
D.ROB FF1900 FF8023 D.WORK 000000 000000
00003B 205 000332 008
000695 07B 000015 2A9
(If no <dir> is given, the currently selected examined.)
Associated commands
•CAT •INFO
directory is
*FORM <40/80> (<drive>) (<drive>) (<drive>) (<drive>) etc
Purpose
This command is used to format a disc, enabling it to be used with DFS 2.10 (or with earlier DFS versions). The command has the same function as the utilities described in chapter 7 of this user guide, but has slight operating differences as detailed below.
Examples
*FORM 40
Format which drive ? 0
G0 (Y/N) ? Y
Formatting drive 0 track <track number> (runs from :&00 to &27)
Formats a 40-track disc in drive 0.
*FORM 80
Format which drive ? 0
G0 (Y/N) ? Y
Formatting drive 0 track <track number> (runs from &00 to &4F) Formats an 80-track disc in drive 0.
2

*FORM 8O 0 2
GO (Y/N) ? Y
Formatting drive 0 track <track number> (runs from Formatting drive 2 track <track number> (runs from
Formats both sides of an 80-track disc in drive 0.
&00 to &4F) &00 to 84F)
&00 to &4F) &00 to &4F) &00 to &4F) &00 to &4F)
*FORM 8O 0 2 1 3 GO (Y/N) ? Y Formatting drive Formatting drive Formatting drive Formatting drive
0 track <track number> (runs from 2 track <track number> (runs from 1 track <track number> (runs from 3 track <track number> (runs from
Formats both sides of 80-track discs in drives 0 and 1 of a dual disc drive.
Associated commands
*ENABLE *VERIFY
Notes
not possible to format discs for a 40-track drive in an 80- drive, nor is it possible to format discs for an 80-track
in a 40-track drive. (40-track drives use 48 tracks per inch;
It is
track
drive
80-track drives use 96 tracks per inch.)
The formatting process uses some I/O processor RAM space, ( approximately 3.5K bytes above OSHWM (usually PAGE in BASIC)), so if you wish to save a program you should do so before formatting a disc. When formatting a disc, screen memory corruption may occur in any non-shadow display mode for values of OSHWM greater than &2200. For example, formatting a disc using a BBC Microcomputer with DFS 2. 10 and ADFS installed, and with a second processor connected and switched on, will corrupt screen memory in display MODEs 0. 1, or 2.
It is not necessary to insert a space before any of the parameters following *FORM.
Pressing anything other than Y in answer to the G0 (Y/N) prompt results in the formatting sequence being abandoned. Using the *ENABLE command immediately before the *FORM command results in the GO (Y/N) prompt being omitted from the sequence.
If formatting a track fails at the first attempt, a ? is displayed after the track number concerned. If the track fails to format after six attempts, formatting is abandoned and a disc fault reported.
The minimum abbreviation for *FORM is *F0. . 3

*FREE (<drive>) Purpose
To display, for the specified drive, the number of .files that can be added to the catalogue together with the amount of space used and left to be used in terms of sectors {in hexadecimal) and bytes (in decimal).
Examples
*FREE
31 Files 31E Sectors 204,288 Bytes Free 00 Files 002 Sectors 512 Bytes Used
Displays free space in the current drive. *FREE 1
00 Files 038 Sectors 14,336 Bytes Free 31 Files 2E8 Sectors 190,464 Bytes Used
Displays free space in drive 1.
Associated commands
*COMPACT *MAP
Notes
The minimum abbreviation for *FREE is *FR.
*MAP (<drive>) Purpose
To display a map of the free space available on the disc. The format is a list of pairs of numbers of the form:
<Sector address> :length in sectors>
Examples *MAP Address : 010 : 10A : 180 :
Displays the
*MAP 1 Address : 045 : 119 : 200 :
Length 004 023 050
free space map on the current. drive.
Length 001 080 03A
4

Displays the free space map on drive 1. Associated commands
*COMPACT *FREE *EX
Notes
If there are a large number of entries in the free space map then the disc contents have become fragmented and compaction is needed. Use the *COMPACT command.
The minimum abbreviation for *MAP is *MA.
*ROMS (<rom id >)
Purpose
Produces a list of the installed ROMs. The information displayed consists of the ROM socket number (rom id, see 'Notes' below), the ROM type, the title of the software in the ROM and its version number, if appropriate. If a <rom id>. is included, then information is displayed just for the specified ROM (if it is present). The ROM can be identified by its socket number or by its title. The ROM type is displayed as L for a language ROM, S for a service ROM (eg a filing system ROM), or SL for a service/language ROM.
Examples (Model B
*ROMS Rom 15 : Rom 11 :
Plus only)
( L) BASIC (S ) DFS 2.0
Catalogues the installed ROMs.
*ROMS 11
Rom 11 (S ) DFS 2.0
Catalogues the ROM with ID number 11.
*ROMS BASIC
Rom 15 ( L) BASIC
Catalogues the BASIC ROM. Notes
The ROM socket. numbers for the BBC Microcomputer Model B Plus are detailed under the *FX142 command heading in chapter 43 of the BBC Microcomputer System User
5

*VERIFY (<drive>) (<drive>) (<drive>) (<drive>) etc
Purpose
Checks the integrity of each sector of a disc. *FORM<40/80> performs an automatic verification of each track immediately after formatting it.
Examples
*VERIFY
Verify which drive ? 1
Verifying drive 1 track <track number>
Verifies drive 1. <track number> runs from &0O to &27 or &0O to &4F as appropriate.
*VERIFY 0
Verifying drive 0 track <track number>
Verifies drive O. Associated commands
*FORM40 *FORM8 0
Notes
If the first attempt to verify a track fails, a ? will be displayed with the track number. If the track fails to verify after five more attempts, verification is abandoned, and a disc fault is reported.
The minimum abbreviation for the *VERIFY command is *V.
Changed commands
The following keywords do not behave exactly as described in chapter 6 of the user guide:
*BACKUP, *DESTROY, *ENABLE
*BACKUP and *DESTROY employ a similar prompt system to the *FORM<40/80>
command (see above). They do not need to be enabled, but prior use of the *ENABLE command will result in the GO (Y/N) ? prompt being omitted.
*DRIVE <drive>
The syntax of this command has been changed to
*DRIVE <drive> (40/80)
The new parameter allows an 8O track drive to read 40 track discs by double—stepping the drive head.
6

Examples
*DRIVE 1 40
switches drive 1 of an 80-track drive to 40-track disc mode ( read only).
*DRIVE 1 80
sets drive 1 to 80 track operation.
Notes
*DRIVE <drive> 40 and *DRIVE <drive> 80 should not be used with a 40 track disc drive.
Attempting to write using an 80 track drive while in 40 track mode will result in a Disc read only error message.
*FORM ignores the 40 track mode selected with *DRIVE. The *FORM<40/80> command will format the disc size given by the *FORM<40/80> parameter. Note that an 80 track drive cannot correctly format discs for 40 track drives, and vice versa.
The command *VERIFY will check a properly formatted 40 track disc in an 80 track drive set to 40 track operation.
Error messages
The Drive fault error message (&C5) has been deleted.
Keyboard links
The interpretation of the keyboard link settings varies slightly from the description given in chapter 12, as shown below:
Link 3 Link 4 Step time 0 0 6 ms
1 0 12 ms
0 1 20 ms
1 1 30 ms (default)
BBC microcomputer 800K drives give optimum performance with a stepping rate of 6 ms. Drive stepping rates can be set with the *FX255 command. See the BBC Microcomputer System User Guide for details.
7

BBC Microcomputer
Disc Filing System User Guide
Addendum 2
Special Starting Procedure for Protected Discs
Some discs use specially formatted sectors/tracks which are normally reported as 'faulty' by the DFS. This means that *BACKUP, *COPY, etc. will not read the disc and so the owner of the disc will be unable to reproduce it.
Certain formats which were used in conjunction with an 8271 disc controller IC cannot normally be read by a 1770 disc controller. The special loading program which is on a protected disc will not, therefore, work on a machine using 1770 DFS.
The model B+ is highly compatible with model B machines; the later OS version 2.00 fitted to model B+ does not normally affect its compatibility. However, some 'protected' programs include an additional test which reads the machine Operating System type code, by using INKEY-256 or its OSBYTE equivalent. Unfortunately, this test fails on the model B+ (OS 2.00).
CTRL Z BREAK
A special boot loading mode, CTRL Z BREAK, has been introduced into 1770 DFS 2.20 and later. This new mode uses an alternative 8271 emulation technique which may enable otherwise unloadable discs to be booted-in successfuly.
In addition, the special boot mode returns -1 to the INKEY-256 command and so will improve the compatibility of the model B+ with software written for model B machines.
When to use CTRL Z BREAK
Normally, discs are booted-in by using SHIFT and BREAK ( or SHIFT D BREAK if DFS is not your default filing system). This procedure will automatically *EXEC a file called !BOOT from drive 0.
Always try SHIFT <D> BREAK first.
If SHIFT <D> BREAK fails to load the disc, try using the special boot mode SHIFT Z BREAK, or even CTRL SHIFT Z BREAK - (hold down CTRL, SHIFT and Z together, press and release BREAK quickly followed by CTRL, then release SHIFT and Z together).
If none of these options will run the disc program, you should check with the software supplier, or the dealer from whom you bought the disc, about its compatibility with 1770 DFS.
September 1985 0403,700 Issue 2 Addendum 2 (0433,051)

The Disc Filing System
User Guide
Part no 403700 Issue no 2 Date July 1983

AUTHOR'S NOTE: Wherever the letters BBC are mentioned in this book, they refer to the British Broadcasting Corporation.
©Copyright Acorn Computers Limited 1983
Neither the whole or any part of the information contained in, or the product described in, this manual may be adapted or reproduced in any material form except with the prior written approval of Acorn Computers Limited (Acorn Computers).
The product described in this manual and products for use with it are subject to continuous development and improvement. All information of a technical nature and particulars of the product and its use (including the information and particulars in this manual) are given by Acorn Computers in good faith. However, it is acknowledged that there may be errors or omissions in this manual. A list of details of any amendments or revisions to this manual can be obtained upon request from Acorn Computers Technical Enquiries. Acorn Computers welcome comments and suggestions relating to the product and this manual.
All correspondence should be addressed to: Technical Enquiries
Acorn Computers Limited
Fulbourn Road
Cherry Hinton Cambridge CB1 4JN
All maintenance and service on the product must be carried out by Acorn Computers' authorised dealers. Acorn Computers can accept no liability whatsoever for any loss or damage caused by service or maintenance by unauthorised personnel. This manual is intended only to assist the reader in the use of the product, and therefore Acorn Computers shall not be liable for any loss or damage whatsoever arising from the use of any information or particulars in, or any error or omission in, this manual, or any incorrect use of the product.
First published 1983
Published by Acorn Computers Limited Typeset by Bateman Typesetters, Cambridge

Contents
Introduction 1
About this manual 1
1 What is a disc system? 2
A disc drive 2 What the disc drive does 3 Disc Filing System 4 Controlling the filing system 5 Summary 6
2 Getting going 7
3 Discs 10
Handling 10 Preventing accidental erasure 12 Copying information 12 Proceed as follows 13 Tracks, sectors and bytes 17 What is formatting? 17
4 Disc files 19
File specifications 19 Drive numbers 20 Directories 20 File names 21 Multi-file operations 21 Auto-start facilities 23 Library directory 23
5 The BREAK key 25
6 The filing system commands 26
Command 26 Purpose 26

Example 26 Description 26 Associated commands 27 Demonstration program 27 Notes 27 Diagrams 27 (The Disc Filing System commands follow in alphabetical order)
7 The filing system utilities 64
8 Random access files 69
9 Using the filing system in assembler 74
General principles 74 OSFIND 75 OSARGS 75 On exit 76 OSFILE 76 On entry 76 OSFILE control block 76 Read/write one byte 78 On exit 78 Read/write a group of bytes 78 On entry 79 On exit 79 Read/write a sector 81 On exit 81
10 Changing filing systems 82
11 Error messages 83
12 Technical information 86
18-bit addressing 86 Disc catalogue 86 Sector 00 86 Sector 01 87 File system initialise and !BOOT 87 Link facilities 88 Links 1 and 2 88

Links 3 and 4 88 Link 5 89 Links 6, 7 and 8 89
13 Filing system command summary 90
Index 92


Introduction
Before you start using the Disc Filing System, check that you have all the following items:
— A single disc drive, or a dual disc drive (two single drives in the same box). Both single and dual drives should be fitted with ribbon cable and power cable.
— A filing system utilities disc.
— A BBC Model B Microcomputer fitted with a disc interface, which should
only be fitted by an authorised dealer.
If any of the necessary items are missing then contact your supplier, quoting the order number given to you when you placed your order. The number also appears on the dispatch label.
About this manual
You will notice that some letters, words and phrases in this manual have been printed differently from the rest of the text. This is to help you to tell the difference between explanatory text, words which appear on the computer screen (including BASIC keywords), and certain keys on the computer keyboard.
— Ordinary text appears like this, or like this for emphasis.
— Text typed in at the computer or displayed on the screen or BASIC
keywords appear Like this.
— Words like RETURN mean that you press the key marked RETURN
rather than actually type the letters RE T U R N.

1 What is a disc system?
If you have never used a computer with discs before there are one or two new concepts which you need to learn.
A disc drive
As you probably know, computers have internal memory called Random Access Memory or RAM. When you type in your program it is stored in RAM. However, when you switch off the computer, everything stored in RAM is lost, so if you need the program again, you have to re-type it. To overcome this problem the computer must be able to transfer the contents of RAM into some form of permanent or 'non-volatile' storage before you switch it off. The User Guide which comes with your BBC Microcomputer describes how to use a cassette recorder for this purpose. Transferring a program from RAM to tape is called saving it, transferring from tape back to RAM is called loading it. The disadvantages of using tape are:
— The process of saving and loading is quite slow.
— You need to keep track of where on the tape each piece of information is,
so that you do not record over it.
— You have to wind the tape to the right place yourself.
— Winding from one end of the tape to the other is slow.
— It is not possible to wind the tape to a particular point accurately.
A disc system does not have these disadvantages. To help you to understand how a disc system works, we shall draw some comparisons with a filing cabinet. A disc system always includes at least one disc drive. The BBC Microcomputer's disc drives are buff-coloured metal boxes approximately 15. 5cm X 9cm X 24cm. The front of a disc drive is black. On the front is the BBC owl, a small red light and a spring flap called the disc drive door. The door can be opened or closed, but must be closed while the disc drive is supposed to be working. These are floppy disc drives, as distinct from fixed disc drives, which you may have heard of. The disc drive can be compared to an empty filing cabinet with no drawers in it yet.
Just as a filing cabinet is pretty useless without drawers, so a disc drive cannot do much without discs. The discs used with the BBC Microcom-

puter are 51⁄4" soft-sectored floppy discs. They can be inserted and removed from the disc drive via the slot in the front. There is one right way of inserting them, and several wrong ways. As in the case of the filing cabinet drawers, putting them in the wrong way is a waste of time. Fig 1 shows the correct way to insert a disc. To stress this:
Discs should be inserted with the label upwards and with the edge nearest the label in your hand. The edge opposite to the label and the read/write slot of the disc go in first.
Fig 2 shows and names the various parts of a disc and chapter 3 gives more detailed information about them. The discs hold the information. Just as you can put different cassettes in a cassette recorder, you can also put different discs into a disc drive; but the computer can only read information from one disc at a time. A disc may have lots of different groups of information on it, and these groups are called 'files'. Files can have any information in them. Typical examples would be one of your programs or some data generated by a program which you wish to keep.
Returning again to the comparison with a filing cabinet, opening a drawer and throwing all the papers into it at random would make it difficult to find them again. To solve this problem, people usually put dividers into a filing cabinet drawer, and often these are labelled alphabetically. The result is that the information is grouped so that you can find it again quickly. The same principle is followed when the computer puts information on to a disc. When you first buy discs, they are blank — like empty drawers. Before the computer can put any information on them, the discs must first be prepared by having marks put on them, which divide the discs into sectors. A 'sector' is the name given to a set of equal divisions created on the disc by the computer. (See Fig 5.) This operation is called `formatting' and is fully described in chapter 7.
What the disc drive does
When you insert the disc into the disc drive and close the drive door, a rotating boss engages with the central hole in the disc and spins the magnetic disc inside its protective jacket. (Do not confuse the protective jacket with the disc envelope — see Fig 2.) In order to read or write information on to the disc the disc drive has a 'read/write head'. This head is designed to move in and out along the 'head slot' in the disc jacket. This head actually rests on the surface of the magnetic disc as it rotates inside
What is a disc system? 3

4 What is a disc system?
the jacket. When you want to read some of the information on the disc, you give the computer the name of the file containing that information. The computer will move the read/write head to the sector on the disc where the start of the information in the named file is recorded. This is equivalent to you opening the filing cabinet drawer, looking along the dividers until you find the one you want and then preparing to remove the relevant file for reading.
At this point it is worth noting that your files may be too large to fit into the fixed size of one sector. This is no problem. A file always begins in a new sector but may occupy a number of sectors following the first. Each sector can hold up to 256 characters or 'bytes'.
Disc Filing System
The main disadvantage of using a cassette recorder to store information is that you have to control the cassette recorder and keep track of the information on it.
When using a disc this is all done for you by the 'Disc Filing System'. The Disc Filing System is a machine-code program produced by the computer manufacturer. On the BBC Microcomputer it is stored in a special kind of memory inside the computer called 'Read Only Memory' or ROM. The program is not lost when you switch the computer off. Once installed, it is always there. All the actions of the disc drive are controlled by the computer using this program. When you prepare new discs by formatting them this is done by the Disc Filing System. When you SAVE one of your BASIC programs the Disc Filing System does the following:
— Starts the disc drive working.
— Finds a free place on the disc big enough for your program.
— Makes a note of where it put your program so as to be able to find it
again.
— Moves the disc drive's read/write head accurately to the start of the first
sector in the free space.
— Transfers a copy of your program from the RAM to the disc.
— Stops the disc drive.
All this is done without you having to think about it and is quite a bit quicker than saving a program on to a cassette tape.

When you save a program you have to give it a name. This is true for the disc system as well as the cassette system. However, the Disc Filing System puts the name to special use. The first two sectors on every disc are reserved for a ' catalogue' when the disc is formatted.
The name of your program, referred to as a file name, is written into the catalogue together with the number of the sector on the disc where the ° information starts. (Note it may continue over several sectors.) When you want the file containing your program back again you simply type LOAD "file name". The filing system checks the catalogue to find out where on the disc to find the file, and then moves the read/write head to that exact place on the disc. The file is then loaded into the computer's memory (RAM) automatically. This illustrates another advantage of a disc drive. The read/write head can be quickly moved to any point on the disc with great accuracy. (Incidentally, the precision engineering needed to accomplish this explains why disc drives cost so much more than cassette recorders.) Because of this accuracy, a number of other facilities are available besides loading and saving programs. These include the ability to copy, delete, build and rename files. Additional facilities let you examine a disc catalogue, restrict access to files or move directly to specific points within a file.
As a final comparison, imagine an automatic filing cabinet where to find something all you have to do is specify the name of a document and paragraph number within it. The filing cabinet drawer opens, the correct divider is selected, the document is located and then presented to you open at the appropriate page. You may see why microcomputers have become so popular in offices.
Controlling the filing system
The filing system controls the disc drive, and we must be able to give instructions to the filing system. Two ways are provided. One is by typing a `*' character, followed by a special command. These are all listed in chapter 6 together with details of their functions. Any of these direct commands can be incorporated in a program if required. Chapter 8 describes the use of a number of BASIC keywords, with special reference to files created on a disc. All these keywords are introduced in the BBC Microcomputer User Guide.
What is a disc system? 5

6 What is a disc system?
Summary
A disc system includes either one or two disc drives, some discs, a connection to the computer and a machine-code program permanently in the computer called a 'Disc Filing System'.
A disc is inserted into a disc drive where it spins round inside its protective jacket.
The disc drive's read/write head moves in and out along a radius of the disc as it spins around.
The Disc Filing System controls the disc drive and the movement of the head.
Discs are divided into sectors by the filing system and the first two sectors are reserved for a catalogue.
Programs and other information are stored on the disc and are given a `file name'.
By referring to the catalogue, the filing system can find any information on a disc associated with a specified file name.
Files can occupy more than one sector.
Procedures are provided to locate particular points in files.
Instructions may be given to the filing system by direct command or from within a program.

2 Getting going
With the power turned off, connect the two cables from the disc drive to the underside of the computer as shown in Fig 1. The plugs are designed so that they will only fit one way. The plug on the power cable is shaped like a rectangle with two adjacent corners cut off. Do not force it in the wrong way round. Sometimes the plug on the ribbon cable has a lump on one side which locates into a notch in the socket on the computer. Alternatively, you may have to try both possible ways before you get it right. When the drive is connected, turn on the power and press BREAK . The following message, or one very similar, should appear on the screen:
BBC Computer Acorn DFS BASIC
>
This indicates that the Disc Filing System is installed and working OK. Now press the SHIFT key and tap the BREAK key, then release the SHIFT key. The disc drive motor will start turning for a couple of seconds and the red light on the front of the drive will come on. This shows that the disc drive is properly connected and working. If nothing happens, check the connections between the disc drive and computer.
The foregoing assumes that the auto-start option has been set to work when SHIFT is held down with BREAK . (See chapter 4.)
Insert the utilities disc into drive 0. (With dual drives, drive 0 is the one at the top. See Fig 1.)
Press SHIFT and BREAK again. This time the following message will appear on the screen:
Hello, this is the BBC microcomputer. This message was automatically loaded.

8 Getting going
The utilities disc contains three useful programs:
*FORM40 formats a 40 track disc *FORM80 formats an 80 track disc *VERIFY verifies a disc
These programs are used by typing their name.
There are also a number of demonstration programs on this disc. Press the SPACE BAR to see them run.
This is an example of a !BOOT file which will be explained in more detail later. Now press the SPACE BAR to continue. This will run the series of demonstration programs supplied on the disc. When the > prompt reappears on the screen you can start entering your programs or filing system commands, but before you do that, read the next two chapters, 'Discs' and 'Disc files'.

Fig 1 Connecting the disc drive
Getting going 9

3 Discs
The BBC Microcomputer uses 51⁄4" soft-sectored floppy discs for storing information. You may have heard them referred to as 'floppy discs', 'discettes', or ` mini-discs'; we will always refer to them simply as discs. (The American spelling is disk.)
Two types of disc drive are available for the BBC Microcomputer, a single unit ( 100Kbytes) and a dual unit (800Kbytes). Discs used on one type will not work on the other. A disc from a single drive will store about 100,000 characters, equivalent to 50 pages of this book. Discs from a dual drive unit will store about 400,000 characters each. It is possible to use two single disc drives linked together providing space for storing about 200,000 characters, but this is not a standard option.
Handling
Discs should be handled with care to avoid physical damage or damage to the recorded information. Fig 2 will help you to identify the various parts of the disc that we are referring to. The following guidelines should be observed:
— Do not try to remove the circular magnetic disc from the square, black protective jacket covering it.
— Do not touch the exposed recording surfaces.
— Avoid dust. Put the discs back into their envelopes when they are not in the
disc drive.
— Do not bend them, drop them on the floor or put heavy objects on them.
— Keep them in a storage box designed for the purpose.
— Keep them away from strong magnetic fields such as those generated by
televisions, monitors, tape recorders, telephones, transformers, calculators,
etc.
— Avoid excessive heat, moisture and direct sunlight.
— Only use felt-tipped pens to write on the labels and don't press hard.
— Insert discs into the drive carefully. If it rotates noisily open the drive door
and adjust it. If you get an error message such as Disk fault or Drive fault, then the disc probably hasn't centred in the drive. To overcome this, make sure that the drive spindles are

rotating by addressing the drive before closing the drive door. This is especially important when a new disc is inserted.
Information is packed quite densely onto the disc, so it is sensitive to even very small scratches and particles of food, dust, tobacco, etc.
The foregoing is deliberately comprehensive but do not let it frighten you from using the discs. Handled sensibly, a disc will give good service.
Fig 2 A 51⁄4" disc
Discs 11

12 Discs
Preventing accidental erasure
You will notice from Fig 2 that there is a small notch in the side of a disc called the 'write-protection' notch. It is used to protect the information on a disc from being overwritten. Every box of discs is supplied with a number of adhesive tabs which can be used to cover the write-protection notch in the disc. The diagram below shows that covering the notch with one of the adhesive tabs will prevent the disc drive from writing to the disc and from deleting anything on it. Reading the existing information on the disc is still allowed.
 Copying information
Another way of protecting important information is to keep several copies of it on different discs. Where computers are used in business, industry or other activities which use large volumes of information, a standard routine for this has been evolved. It is often called the `grandfather, father, son' principle of copying information, and is good practice for anyone using a disc storage system. It works as follows:
Day 1, MASTER copied to GRANDFATHER Day 2, MASTER copied to FATHER
Day 3, MASTER copied to SON
As you can see, it involves keeping three separate discs, each with a copy of the information from the master disc on it. On day 4 the master would be copied to the grandfather again and so the cycle continues. In business, where information on disc changes from day to day, this regular

routine is important. For personal computing it may not be so vital, but you will want to keep several copies of important programs and information which you have worked hard to produce. The filing system provides two facilities which make copying information easy. These are *BACKUP and *COPY which allow you to copy a complete disc, or specified sections of it. See Figs 3 and 4 and the appropriate sections of chapter 6 for full details.
We suggest that you make a copy of your utilities disc now!
Proceed as follows
If it has not been done already write-protect the utilities disc with a tab, as described. This is very important otherwise you might lose all the information on the disc.
Insert the utilities disc into drive 0 and type
*FORM 40 RETURN
or (if you have a dual drive 80 track unit)
*FORM 80 RETURN
Remove the utilities disc and put a new disc in its place. Do not forget to
change the disc over. If you format the utilities disc you will lose everything on it.
In reply to the question displayed, type
Y
What the computer now does is called 'formatting' which prepares the new disc for use with the BBC Microcomputer. A series of numbers are displayed, and when the formatting is finished the word Formatted appears. Now remove the new disc and put the utilities disc back again.
If you have a dual drive, put the new disc into drive 1 (the other drive) and type
*ENABLE *BACKUP 0 1
RETURN
Discs 13
   RETURN

14 Discs
The computer will now make a complete copy of the utilities disc on the new disc.
If you have a single drive, type
*ENABLE *BACKUP 0 0
then follow the instructions on the screen to insert the utilities (master) disc and the new disc alternately. (See Fig 4.)
If the message
Disk read only
appears, it means you had the wrong disc in the. drive. Start again from ENABLE.
RETURN
 RETURN

Fig 3 Copying
Discs 15

16 Discs
Fig 4 Single disc drive copying

Tracks, sectors and bytes
Information is written on to the disc in concentric circles, called tracks. Each track is divided into ten sectors. Each sector is further divided into 256 bytes. Space on the disc and in the computer's memory is measured in bytes, and one byte corresponds to one character. 256 of the bytes in each sector are available for storing your programs and data. From this it follows that a 40 track single- sided, single track density disc of the type used in the single drive unit will hold:
40 tracks X 10 sectors X 256 bytes = 102400 bytes
(or characters) of information. The dual drive unit uses double-sided, double track density discs. Therefore with 80 tracks on each side, one disc will hold:
160 tracks X 10 sectors X 256 bytes = 409600 bytes (or characters) of information.
What is formatting?
The Disc Filing System automatically records the location of your programs and data on the disc. The first two sectors on track zero of a disc are reserved for this purpose. The 'catalogue' of a disc is recorded in these sectors. Whenever you wish to access a piece of information on the disc, the filing system reads the catalogue first to find out where on the disc it can be found. The tracks and sectors are the reference marks on disc which make this possible.
Clearly before a disc can be used by the filing system for storing your information it must have these 'reference marks' put onto it. All new discs must be prepared in this way. The process is called 'formatting'. It includes setting up the track and sector format on the disc and creating the catalogue. ( Full details are provided in the technical information in chapter 12.)
The filing system utilities disc has two programs on it called *FORM 40 and *FORM 80 which perform this task for 40 and 80 track discs. Each sector on each track is given a unique three-digit identifier in the catalogue. The first two digits are the track number, the last one is the sector number. The sectors are numbered 0 to 9 and the tracks 00 to 39 (or 79 if it is an 80 track disc).
The important thing to remember is that new discs must be formatted before you can use them with your computer.
Discs 17

18 Discs
Fig 5 Tracks, sectors and bytes

4 Disc files
Probably the first thing you will want to do with the filing system is to record one of your programs onto a disc. You can do this simply by using the SAVE command in BASIC, and the filing system takes care of the rest. (Note: Not to be confused with *SAVE described later in this manual.) When you have typed the program into the computer the SAVE command causes it to be copied onto the disc. When SAVEd, the program must be given a name. This is called the file name and is used to identify the program when you want to copy it back from the disc into the computer's memory. Each program SAVEd onto the same drive must be given a unique name. The format of the SAVE command is
SAVE "filename"
where " filename " can be up to seven characters. Letters and digits are allowed.
The characters
#*-:
have special meanings which are explained later.
The file name is written into the catalogue together with the sector number where the information starts. Next time you refer to the file name, the filing system checks the catalogue to see where the information has been placed on the disc, and the old file is deleted and replaced by the new one. The filing system ensures that each new file begins with a new sector.
File specifications
The full specification for a file is
: Drive number . Directory . File name
: <drv>. <dir>. <filename>
eg:
:1.Z.MYPROG1

20 Disc files
Notice the drive number, directory and file name are separated by full-stops. These are needed so that the computer can distinguish the separate parts of the file specification.
Drive numbers
Drive numbers must be in the range 0 to 3 and preceded by a : (colon). The colon tells the computer: 'This is the start of a file specification, the drive number follows.'
The drives are numbered as shown below. Notice that each side of a double- sided disc is given a separate drive number.
Single drive, single-sided Drive 0
Dual drive, double-sided Drive 0
Drive 2
Drive 1
Drive 3
   The effect of including the drive number in the full specification is that
:1 .$.MYPROG 1 is different from : 2.$.MYPROG 1
Although the file names are the same, they are on different drives.
Directories
The directory is a single character used to divide the catalogue into independent sections. Files of the same name can be created on the same disc with different directories. Although on the same drive,
:1.$.MYPROG is a different file from :1.A.MYPROG because the directory is different.

File names
The file name can be up to seven of most of the characters on the keyboard in any combination, except # * : . as we mentioned earlier. When we need to refer to the complete file specification in future we will use the abbreviation <fsp>.
When the filing system is started by pressing BREAK or SHIFT BREAK , the current directory and drive number is always set to drive 0 and directory $. The drive and directory can therefore be omitted from file specifications. They will be assumed to have these values.
Typing
SAVE "MYPROG"
will automatically store your program in a file named
:0 .$.MYPROG
assuming you have not changed the current drive and directory. (Chapter 6: ' The filing system commands' explains how you can change the current drive and directory with the commands *DRIVE and *DIR.)
Multi-file operations
Another common term used to refer to multi-file operations is 'wild card' facilities. Some of the filing system commands can operate on a number of files instead of just one. These are all followed by the abbreviation <afsp> instead of <fsp> (<afsp> stands for 'ambiguous file specification'). *INFO is an example of such a command. It provides information about a named file, eg:
*INFO :0 .$.MYPROG RETURN
will display information about the file named MYPROG in directory $ on
drive 0.
However, it is possible that you want information about a number of files. The
'wild card' facilities enable you to specify several files for the command to operate on. The wild cards are provided by the characters * and
Disc files 21

22 Disc files
# which have special meanings when they appear in the file specification, eg:
*INFO :0.#.MYPROG
means: 'Display information about files called MYPROG in any directory on
drive 0'.
*INFO :0.$.MYPRO#
means: 'Display information about all files on drive 0 in directory $ with names starting "MYPRO" followed by any single character.' eg:
MYPROA, MYPROT and MYPROG and so on.
*INFO ### RETURN
gives information on all files with three-letter file names in the current directory.
The character * means multiple # s to the end of the field, eg *INFO :0.$.M*
will display information about any files on drive 0 and directory $ whose names begin with M.
*INFO *A* RETURN
gives information on all files in the current directory with an A in them: for
example, A, AB, FREDA, PGRAM1 etc.
*INFO *.* RETURN
gives information on all files, in all directories.

Auto-start facilities
Sometimes it is useful to make a program or a file on one of your discs *LOAD, *RUN or *EXEC automatically when you insert the disc and press SHIFT and BREAK . This can be done using a file named !BOOT. !BOOT is a special file name recognised by the filing system when you start the computer by pressing SHIFT BREAK . If there is a file of specification
:0.$.!BOOT
the filing system will do one of four things according to the option set on the disc using *OPT 4,n (see chapter 6).
Option 0: ignores !BOOT
Option 1: *LOADs !BOOT into memory
Option 2: *RUNs !BOOT as a machine-code program not a BASIC program Option 3: *EXECs !BOOT
See chapter 6: 'The filing system commands' under the section *EXEC for an explanation of option 3. That section also describes how to use this auto-start facility to make the computer run one of your BASIC programs automatically.
The options can be changed using the *OPT 4 command. The 'Hello' program on the filing system utilities disc is loaded using a !BOOT file.
As well as programs, you may wish to store data on the discs. The filing system provides facilities for storing and retrieving the data quickly and selectively under the control of your programs.
One of the methods is to use a type of file called a 'random access file' –see chapter 8.
Library directory
The Disc Filing System enables you to specify one drive/directory as the ` library'. This will always be set to :0.$ when you start the computer by pressing BREAK . It can be altered using the filing system command
Disc files 23

24 Disc files
*LIB, until the next BREAK . All the utility programs should be located in the library. This is because when you type
* (utility name) RETURN it is equivalent to typing
*RUN (utility name) RETURN
where the drive and directory are omitted and will be assumed to be either the
current drive/directory or the library. The filing system will first search the current drive/directory for the file and then, if it cannot find it there, it searches the library.

5 The BREAK key
The BREAK key resets the BBC Microcomputer. However, the Disc Filing System can reserve some of its status after BREAK . There are two types of the first is called 'hard break', and is achieved by holding down the key and pressing ; The second is called 'soft break', and is
done by just pressing the key.
As far as the Disc Filing System is concerned, hard break is the same as switching the computer off and then on again. The directory and library are set to :0.$ and any open files are forgotten about. Data written to a file which is still open may be lost. (Cold start.)
When you do a soft break, the Disc Filing System preserves its status, ie the directory and library remain the same, and open files remain open, but again — data may be lost. (Warm start.)
If you press SHIFT BREAK to make the Disc Filing System auto-start using the !BOOT file, the Disc Filing System does a cold start as per CTRL BREAK .
Important: To do a warm start, as per a soft break, or going *TAPE then *DISC to restart the DFS, the DFS must assume that the contents of RAM below the default value of PAGE have not been corrupted. This means that if you have been using proprietary software which uses all the RAM from &E00 upwards, you must exit the program with a hard break to obtain normal DFS operation.
  BREAK
 CTRL
 BREAK
 BREAK

6 The filing system commands
The Disc Filing System is an 8K byte program. BASIC programs are stored on a disc or tape, but the filing system is stored in Read Only Memory (ROM) inside the BBC Microcomputer. The filing system controls the reading and writing of information to and from the discs and provides a number of useful facilities for maintaining that information. The following pages describe all the filing system commands. They are words which the filing system program will recognise and act on. They can be typed directly on to the keyboard or embedded within your BASIC program. They are all prefixed with the * character which signals the computer that a filing system command follows. Each command is described under a number of sections with headings as follows:
Command
This is followed by a syntax abbreviation and a few words explaining the derivation of the word.
<drv> = drive
<fsp> = file specification
<dir> = directory
<afsp> = ambiguous file specification: this means that you can get the computer to perform an operation on a number of files at a time by typing in as much of the file names as is common to all these files – followed by a * character. For example, if you want to COPY the files called FRED1, FRED2 and FRED3 from drive 1 to 2, you could type
*COPY 02 FRED* RETURN Purpose
A plain English description of what the command does.
Example
This section gives a few one-line examples of the use of the commands. These examples are only intended to be illustrative.
Description
A description of the command using normal computer jargon.

Associated commands
This section lists commands which have similar functions or are normally used in conjunction with this command.
Demonstration program
Where it is needed, a short program is included to illustrate use of the filing system command in a BASIC program.
Notes
Particular points to watch for or special applications of the command are covered by additional notes if necessary.
Diagrams
Diagrams are used where they make the function of a command clearer.
The filing system commands 27

28 The filing system commands
*ACCESS<afsp> (L)
Purpose
To prevent a file from being deleted or overwritten. The command `locks' or ' unlocks' a file. You cannot delete, overwrite or write to a locked file until you unlock it again. If you load a file which is locked, you will not be able to save it again with the same name. This is because saving a file with the same name as one already on the disc causes the one on the disc to be deleted and replaced with the new file. A locked file cannot be deleted.
Example
*ACCESS HELLO L This locks the file HELLO.
*ACCESS HELLO
unlocks it again so that it can be deleted or overwritten.
Description
Sets or removes file protection on a named file. It prevents a number of other filing system commands from acting on the file.
Notes
Once locked, a file will not be affected by the following commands:
*SAVE *DELETE *WIPE *RENAME *DESTROY
If you attempt to use any of these commands on a locked file the message
Locked
is produced.

If you attempt to use *ACCESS on a write-protected disc the message Disk read only
is produced.
Important: Locking a file does not prevent if from being removed from a disc with *FORM40 or *FORM80 or from being overwritten with *BACKUP.
The filing system commands 29

30 The filing system commands
*BACKUP (source dry) (dest.drv) Purpose
To read all the information on one disc and write it to another, producing two discs with identical information.
Example
*ENABLE *BACKUP 0 1
copies all the information on drive 0 onto drive 1.
Description
Sector by sector copy program.
Associated commands
*COPY *ENABLE
Notes
*ENABLE must be typed before the command will work, otherwise the message
Not enabled
is displayed.
If you give 0 as the source and destination drives, eg:
*BACKUP 0 0
the program will alternately ask you to insert the source and destination discs into drive 0 . This makes it possible to copy discs even if you only have a single drive. A 40 track disc is copied in five sections.
Fig 4 in chapter 3 illustrates the process.

All information previously on the destination disc is overwritten, so be careful not to confuse the source and destination discs. If the source disc is blank, the destination disc will end up blank as well.
Warning: The contents of memory may be overwritten by this command. If you have a program or some data in memory that you want to keep, SAVE it before you use the command.
The filing system commands 31

32 The filing system commands
*BUILD <fsp>
Purpose
To create a file directly from the keyboard. After typing this command everything else entered will go into the named file. This is useful for creating EXEC files and the ! BOOT file described in chapter 4.
Example
*BUILD !BOOT
will cause everything subsequently typed in to be entered into a file called !
BOOT.
Line numbers are displayed on the screen to prompt you to enter your text as
follows:
>*BUILD !BOOT
0001 FIRST LINE OF TEXT 0002 SECOND LINE
0003 ESCAPE
Pressing the ESCAPE key on a line by itself terminates a *BUILD command. Description
Builds a file from the keyboard.
Associated commands
*EXEC *LIST *TYPE

*CAT (<dry>) catalogue Purpose
The command displays the catalogue of a disc on the screen, showing all the files present on the disc. (drv) is the number of the drive you want displayed. If (drv) is omitted, the current drive is assumed.
Example
*CAT 0 PROGRAM (nn) Drive: 0
Di rectory: 0.$
!BOOT SUMS TEST ZOMBIE
A. HELLO L
RETURN
Note that the heading part of the catalogue shows the drive number, the title of the disc, the currently set auto-start option of the disc (in this case 2 for RUN), and the currently selected library and directory. The files are displayed in alphabetical order reading across the two columns. In the example above there are nine files on the disc.
!BOOT to ZOMBIE are in the current directory $. The current directory's files are always listed first. A . HELLO is in directory A. It is also followed by L, meaning that it is a 'locked' file. (See *ACCESS for an explanation.) B. SUMS is in directory B and is not locked.
Option: 2 (RUN) Library: 0 . $
HELLO TABLE VECTORS
B. SUMS
The filing system commands 33

34 The filing system commands
Description
Displays a disc catalogue.
Associated commands
*INFO *ACCESS *TITLE *OPT 4, n
*DIR *DRIVE

*COMPACT < dry> Purpose
Attempting to SAVE a program or file on to a disc may produce the message Disk full if there is no single space available on the disc big enough for the information. It may be that there is enough space, but it is split into several small sections. This command appends all spare space on a disc to the end. When you delete a number of files, the spaces they had occupied will probably be distributed over the disc with current files in between them. *COMPACT moves all current files to the 'start' of the disc leaving the space in one continuous block at the end.
Example
*COMPACT 1
$.HELLO 1700 801F 0003B 002 $.SUMS 1700 801F 00098 003
. . . and so on.
As 'compacting' proceeds, all the current files are displayed in the order in which they occur on the disc.
Description
Moves all available space on a disc into one continuous block following the current files.
Associated commands
*SAVE and BASIC's SAVE and OPENIN. Notes
This facility will only do anything if there is space between the files. There will only be such space if a file has been deleted from between two others. Compacting a disc happens faster if you select mode 7 beforehand.
The filing system commands 35

36 The filing system commands
Fig 6 *COMPACT
Warning: This command may overwrite the contents of memory. If you have a program or data in memory that you want to keep, save it before you use this command.

*COPY <source dry> <dest. dry> <afsp>
Purpose
To copy a named file or files from one disc to another.
Example
*COPY 0 1 HELLO
This copies a file called HELLO in the current directory on drive 0 onto drive 1.
Description
File copy program.
Associated commands
*BACKUP
Notes
The 'wild card' facilities may be used to specify a group of files to be copied, eg:
*COPY 0 1 #.MY*
Copies all files beginning MY irrespective of which directory they are in.
Information already on the destination disc is not affected.
Diagram
Figs 3 and 4 in chapter 3 apply.
Warning: This command may overwrite the contents of memory. If you have a program or data in memory that you want to keep, save it before you use this command.
The filing system commands 37

38 The filing system commands
* DELETE <fsp>
Purpose
To remove a single named file from the catalogue of a disc. The space occupied by the file becomes available for other information. Succeeding file names in the catalogue are shuffled up, but not the files themselves. Once a file is deleted you cannot get it back again.
Example
*DELETE FRED
removes a file called FRED from the current directory on the current disc.
Description
Single file deletion.
Associated commands
*WIPE *DESTROY *COMPACT
Notes
If the disc is write-protected the message
Disk read only
is produced. If the file is not found in the directory, the message
Not found
is displayed. If the file is locked, the message
Locked
appears.
Once deleted, a file cannot be restored.

*DESTROY <afsp>
Purpose
To remove specified files from the disc in a single action. This command may take the ambiguous file specification so that groups of files can be deleted. When you use this command, a list of the files to be deleted is displayed. A single Yes/No question appears at the end of the list offering you the choice to go ahead and delete all the listed files or not. Use this command with care, because its effect is not reversible. It will not attempt to remove locked files. ( See *ACCESS.)
Example
*ENABLE *DESTROY *.H* A. HELLO $.HELLO
Delete (Y/N)
If you type Y in reply to the question all the named files will be deleted. The
message
Deleted
is displayed when the job is done. Typing anything else cancels the command.
Associated commands
*ENABLE *WIPE *DELETE
Notes
Once destroyed, files cannot be restored.
*ENABLE must be typed immediately before *DESTROY, or it will not work and the message
Not enabled
is displayed.
The filing system commands 39

40 The filing system commands
*DIR (<dir>) Set the directory
Purpose
To change the current directory to (<dir>). After a cold start, the current directory is always set to `$'. To save files in a different directory in the catalogue, you must use this command to change the current directory to the one you want and then SAVE them.
Example
*DIR A
This sets the current directory to A. You now have access to any files in directory A in the catalogue. Any files now saved using *SAVE, or BASIC's SAVE, will be in directory A.
Description
Sets the current directory to the argument supplied.
Notes
Directory can be set to any character except these four exceptions
#*.:
This command does not alter the directories written in the catalogue. It merely states which directory in the catalogue you have access to by default.
You can change drive at the same time, and this takes the form
*DIR :<drv>.<di r>
So if the current drive is drive 0 , and the current directory is $ , then
*DIR :2.A
will set the drive to drive 2, and the directory to A. Alternatively, you can set the drive separately using the *DIR command:
*DIR :2

*DRIVE <drv> Set current drive
Purpose
Changes the current drive to <drv>. Any commands which follow will work on <drv> until another drive is specified.
Example
*DRIVE 1
sets the current drive to 1 and
*CAT
will produce a catalogue of drive 1.
*CAT 0
will catalogue drive 0 , but the current drive is still drive 1 until you change it back to 0, or after a cold start.
Description
Sets the current drive, and leaves the current directory unchanged.
The filing system commands 41

42 The filing system commands
* DUMP <fsp>
Purpose
Produces a hexadecimal listing of a file on the screen.
Example
*DUMP SUMS
Description
Hexadecimal screen dump.
Associated commands
*LIST *TYPE
Notes
It is useful to use this command in page mode so that the file is displayed one page at a time on the screen.
CTRL N selects page mode, CTRL O turns it off.

*ENABLE Purpose
Some of the filing system commands produce irreversible effects. To prevent them from being used accidentally, it is necessary to type *ENABLE before they become operational. These commands are:
*BACKUP *DESTROY
Example
*BACKUP
will not work; the message
Not enabled
is produced.
*ENABLE *BACKUP
will work.
Notes
*ENABLE must be typed immediately before the command to be enabled. Any * name command typed in between nullifies the *ENABLE.
The filing system commands 43

44 The filing system commands
*EXEC <fsp> execute Purpose
This command reads byte by byte all the information in a named file as if it was being typed on the keyboard. This is useful when you find that you are repeatedly typing the same sequence of commands. Instead you can build an EXEC file consisting of all these commands and type *EXEC <fsp> each time you want this sequence of commands. *BUILD <fsp> is an associated command used to create an EXEC file.
Example
*EXEC HELLO
takes the contents of file HELLO and reads it one character at a time as if it
was being typed at the keyboard.
Description
Executes the contents of a named file by reading each byte as if it were coming from the keyboard.
Associated commands
*BUILD
Notes
One useful application of the *EXEC command is in association with the auto- start facilities described in chapter 4 and in the section on *OPT 4 in this chapter. If you create a !BOOT file containing the BASIC keyword CHAIN followed by the file name of one of your BASIC programs, the effect of pressing SHIFT BREAK will be to load and run the BASIC program automatically.

*HELP <keyword>
Purpose
Displays useful information on the screen. In the disc system this consists of a list of the filing system commands or the utilities depending on the <keyword> used. The two keywords which produce a response in the Disc Filing System are UTILS and DFS. If just *HELP is typed, the system produces a list of currently installed ROMs and a list of the keywords which will produce further information.
Example
*HELP
DFS 1.00 DFS
UTILS OS 1.20
*HELP DFS DFS 1.00
ACCESS <afsp> (L)
BACKUP <source> <dest.> COMPACT (<drive>)
COPY <source> <dest.> <afsp> DELETE <fsp>
DESTROY <afsp>
DIR(<dir>)
DRIVE <drive>
ENABLE
INFO <afsp>
LIB (<dir>)
RENAME <old fsp> <new fsp> TITLE <title>
WIPE <afsp>
OS 1.20
The filing system commands 45

46 The filing system commands
*HELP UTILS
: DFS 1 .00
BUILD <f sp>
DISC
DUMP <f sp> LIST <f sp> TYPE <f sp>
Notes
*RUN, *SPOOL, *SAVE, *EXEC and *LOAD are not included in these lists because they are Machine Operating System commands which operate outside the Disc Filing System. *HELP is a Machine Operating System command.

*INFO <afsp> Purpose
Displays information about a file or group of files. It includes details not given by *CAT such as the length of the file and its location. It is displayed in the following order across the screen.
Directory File name Access Load address
Example
*INFO A. HELLO
displays
Execution address
Length in bytes
Start sector
A. HELLO L 001900 00801F 00003B 003
Description
Displays detailed file information.
Associated commands
*CAT
Notes
If the file is not found on the specified (or assumed) drive and directory the message
Not found
is produced. The command must be re-entered using the correct <afsp>.
The wild card facilities # and * may be used if you want information about a group of files.
The filing system commands 47

48 The filing system commands
*LIB:(<drv>) <dir> Selects the library Purpose
Sets the library to the specified drive and directory.
Example
*LIB :1.A
sets the library to drive 1 directory A. After this typing
*<filename>
will search directory A on drive 1 for the named file and if it is found the file will be loaded and executed just as if you had typed
*RUN :1.A.<fi lename>
Description
Sets the drive/directory containing the library.
Associated commands
*RUN
Notes
The library can contain files which are utility programs, designed to act on other files eg sorts, edits and merges are all common utility programs. It is then possible to say:
*SORT FRED
where SORT is the name of the file in the library and FRED is the name of another file in the current drive and directory. This makes use of the fact that any text after the <fsp> is stored in memory and is available to your machine code program for interpretation. A pointer to the start address of this text is available to your program via a call to OSARGS with Y=0, A=1 and X=the address of the byte block in page 0 where the text is stored. To read the text stored at this location you must use a call to OSWORD with A=5.

OSWORD call with A=5
Read I/O processor memory. This call enables any program to read a byte in the I/O processor no matter in which processor the program is executing. On entry, X and Y point to a block of memory as follows:
XY LSB of address to be read XY+ 1
XY+ 2
XY+3 MSB of address to be read
On exit, the 8-bit byte will be stored in XY+4.
As this routine reads one byte at a time, you may need to use repeated calls to it to recover all the text following the <fsp>.
Chapter 9 provides more information about using the disc system from assembler programs.
The filing system commands 49

50 The filing system commands
*LIST <fsp> Purpose
Displays a text file on the screen with line numbers.
Example
*LIST DATA
displays the contents of the file called DATA on the screen, line by line with
each line numbered.
Description
ASCII list with line numbers.
Associated commands
*TYPE *DUMP
Notes
BASIC is tokenised, so listing a BASIC program file will display nonsense. ( See the BBC Microcomputer User Guide.) An ASCII text file of a BASIC program can be obtained using the *SPOOL command.
Files written with BASIC keyword PRINT# can also be listed with this command.
In page mode the listing will stop after displaying each screenful, until you press either SHIFT key to make it continue. CTRL N turns page mode on, CTRL O turns it off.

*LOAD <fsp> <address>
Purpose
Reads a named file from the disc into memory in the computer starting at either a specified start address or the file's own load address.
Example
*LOAD HELLO
Reads the file HELLO into memory starting at location 1900 (hex), which is
the load address of the file when it was saved.
(See example in *INFO.) *LOAD HELLO 3200
Reads the file HELLO into memory starting at location 3200 (hex). Other examples are
*LOAD "HELLO" *LOAD "HELLO" 3200
Description
Loads a file into memory.
Associated commands
*SAVE *RUN
Notes
All the above are valid commands. The quotation marks are optional; but either a pair or none should be present. The named file must be in the current directory on the current disc. If the file is not found, the message
Not found
is produced.
The filing system commands 51

52 The filing system commands
*OPT 1 (n)
Purpose
This command enables or disables a message system which displays a file's information (the same as *INFO). Every time a file on the disc is accessed, the information is displayed. (n) can be any number greater than 0 to enable the feature. (n) = 0 disables it.
Example
*OPT 1 1 or *OPT 1, 1 enables the messages;
*OPT 1 0 or *OPT 1, 0
disables the messages.
Description
Message system to display file information at every access.
Associated commands
*INFO
Notes
A space or a comma between *OPT 1 and its argument (n) is essential.

* OPT 4 (n)
Purpose
Changes the auto-start option of the disc in the currently selected drive. There are four options to choose from: 0, 1, 2 or 3. Each option initiates a different action when you press SHIFT and BREAK on the computer. The computer will either ignore or automatically *LOAD, *RUN or *EXEC a file called ! BOOT which must be in the directory $ on drive 0.
The filing system commands 53
  Example
*OPT 4 0 *OPT 4 1 *OPT 4 2 *OPT 4 3
does nothing
will *LOAD the file !BOOT (ie a machine-code file) will *RUN the file !BOOT (ie a machine-code file) will *EXEC the file !BOOT (ie a BASIC file)
When *OPT 4 2 is set, and a machine-code program (ie !BOOT) is executed, it is important to remember that the interrupt flag is undefined (unlike *RUN ning the program, where the interrupt flag is cleared). It is suggested that your machine code !BOOT files contain a CLI to clear the interrupt flag.
Description
Changes the start-up option of a disc.
Notes
It is essential to include a space between the command and (n). *OPT40 would produce the message
Bad option
If the disc is write-protected the error message
Disk read only
is produced in response to the *OPT 4 command.

54 The filing system commands
If the option 0 is set, the !BOOT file need not be there. With any other option the message
Not found or File not found
is produced if !BOOT is not found in directory $ on drive 0.
Important: Do not confuse *OPT4 with BASIC keyword OPT or *OPT 1. They are completely different. Refer also to chapter 12 where it describes how to swap the effects of BREAK and SHIFT BREAK .
The utilities disc is set to option 2 when you receive it so when you press SHIFT BREAK the 'HELLO' program, saved as file !BOOT, is *RUN automatically.

*RENAME (old fsp) (new fsp)
Purpose
Changes the file name and moves it to another directory if required.
Example
*RENAME SUMS B.MATHS
Assuming that the current directory is $, the file $.SUMS becomes B. MATHS.
Description
Renames a file.
Notes
*RENAME :0.$.SUMS : 1.B.MATHS
is not allowed. The file cannot be moved from drive 0 to drive 1 using *RENAME. Only the directory and file name can be changed.
If the file does not exist the message
Not found
is displayed. If the first file is locked
Locked
is displayed. If the disc is write-protected
Disk read only
is displayed. If the <new fsp> has already been used the message
Exists
is displayed.
The filing system commands 55

56 The filing system commands
*RUN <fsp> (parameters to utility)
Purpose
This command is used to run machine-code programs. It loads a file into memory and then jumps to the execution address of that file.
Example
*RUN PROG
will cause a machine-code program in the file called PROG to be loaded and executed starting at the execution address of the file.
Description
Runs a machine-code program.
Associated commands
*SAVE
*LIB (for an explanation of 'parameters to utility')
Notes
This command will not run a BASIC program.
Typing *<fsp> is accepted as being *RUN <fsp>.
Typing *<filename> results in the file being loaded and executed if it is found in the currently selected drive/directory or the library.

*SAVE <filename> <start address>
<finish address> (<execute addr.>) ( <reload addr.>)
Purpose
It is important not to confuse this with the BASIC keyword SAVE– they are quite different. This command takes a copy of a specified section of the computer's memory and writes it on to the disc in the current drive/ directory. It is put into a file of the given name. You will mostly use this command to record your machine-code programs.
Example
*SAVE "PROG" SSSS FFFF (EEEE) (RRRR) *SAVE "PROG" SSSS + LLLL (EEEE) (RRRR)
SSSS = Start address of memory to be saved FFFF = Finish address
EEEE = Execution address (see below) RRRR = Reload address
LLLL = Length of information Notes
RRRR and EEEE may be omitted in which case the reload address and the execution address are assumed to be the same as the start address.
If the disc is write-protected the message
Disk read only
is produced. If there are already 31 files on the disc the message
Cat full
is produced. If the specified file name already exists and is locked the message
The filing system commands 57

58 The filing system commands
Locked
is produced. If the file already exists but is unlocked it is deleted. Then starting in sector 2 track 0 a gap large enough to hold the new information is searched for. If none is found the message
Disk full
is produced.
If enough space is available the information is written on to the disc and the file name is entered on to the catalogue in the current directory.

*SPOOL <fsp>
Purpose
Prepares a file of the specified name on the disc to receive all the information subsequently displayed on the screen. This is a very useful command particularly for producing a text file of one of your BASIC programs. (See notes below.)
Example
You can obtain a text file of one of your BASIC programs as follows:
LOAD "MYPROG"
Loads a program from disc into memory.
*SPOOL FRED
Opens a file called FRED on the disc ready to receive information from the
screen.
LIST
Causes the BASIC program to be displayed on the screen and also written onto the file called FRED.
*SPOOL
Turns off the 'spooling' and closes the file called FRED.
Description
Spools subsequent output to the screen to a named file opened for the purpose. Closes the file when spooling is terminated.
Associated commands
*BUILD *EXEC *LIST *TYPE
The filing system commands 59

60 The filing system commands
Notes
BASIC on the BBC Microcomputer is 'tokenised'. This means that the lines which you type in your program are abbreviated inside the computer's memory and on the disc. A program file will contain these abbreviated 'tokens' rather than your original program text.

*TITLE <disc name>
Purpose
Changes the title of the disc in the current drive to the first 12 characters after the command. It fills in with spaces if there are less than 12 characters. Any characters are allowed.
Example
*TITLE "MY DISC"
This sets the title to "MY DISC" with five spaces added on the end.
*TITLE "A DIFFERENT TITLE"
This changes the title to A DIFFERENT. Anything after the first 12 characters is ignored. The quotation marks are only required if the title includes spaces.
Notes
If the disc is write-protected the message
Disk read only
appears when you try to use this command.
The filing system commands 61

62 The filing system commands
*TYPE <fsp>
Purpose
Displays a text file on the screen without line numbers.
Example
*TYPE HELLO
Description
Screen list of a named file.
Associated commands
*LIST *DUMP
Notes
BASIC programs are not stored on disc as text files when you SAVE them, so this command will display nonsense if you try to display a BASIC program.
Page mode is selected with CTRL N and turned off by CTRL O. Page mode allows you to see a screenful of text at a time: when the screen has filled up, instead of immediately scrolling, the computer waits until you press the SHIFT key. The next screenful then appears.

*WIPE <fsp>
Purpose
Removes specified files from the catalogue and rearranges the catalogue. Asks for confirmation that each file conforming to the specification is to be deleted.
Example
*WIPE *.SU*
is a request to delete all files on the current drive beginning with the letters SU
. As each file is found the file name is displayed like this:
A. SUM
At this point only type Y if you want to delete the file. Typing anything else
leaves the file intact.
Description
Delete with <afsp> and confirmation per file.
Associated commands
*DESTROY *DELETE
Notes
Once deleted using *WIPE, a file cannot be restored. Locked files are not removed. (See *ACCESS)
The filing system commands 63

7 The filing system utilities
As explained in chapter 6 the filing system commands are, in fact, programs stored in ROM (Read Only Memory) inside the BBC Microcomputer.
The utilities are similar programs but they are stored on the utilities disc. They are used in the same way as the commands by typing
*(utility name)
The utilities disc must be in the disc unit at the time. The utility must either be in
the current directory on the current drive or in the library (see command *LIB). There are two 'formatting' utilities supplied: one for 40 track discs, and the the
other for 80 track discs. On the utilities disc these are normally in drive 0, directory $, which are the default values on start-up for both the library and the current drive/directory. (See commands *DRIVE and *DIR.) The third utility is *VERIFY.
The following pages describe the utilities. You can add utilities of your own by saving machine-code programs into the library.

*FORM40 (<drv>)
Format a 40 track disc
Purpose
The command prepares new discs for use with the filing system on the BBC Microcomputer. It marks areas of disc where information will be stored and sets up a catalogue. The catalogue is empty at first, but when you store programs and data on the disc, the catalogue records their positions on the disc. They can then be retrieved quickly by reference to the catalogue. While formatting the information put on to the disc is verified automatically.
Example
To format a new disc insert the utilities disc into the disc drive and type
*FORM40
The computer asks
Do you really want to format drive 0?
Remove the utilities disc. Insert the disc to be formatted and then answer
Y
The formatting starts immediately and the message
Formatting drive (n)
is displayed. As each track is formatted and verified the track number is displayed as follows:
00010203040506070809 0A0B0C0D0E0F10111213 1415161718191A1B1C1D 1E1F2021222324252627 disc formatted
Above is the response if the formatting was successful. If a ? appears in
The filing system utilities 65

66 The filing system utilities
this list, it means that a re-try occurred, so you're advised to reformat the disc. If the formatting was not successful, then either the message
Verify error
or
Format error
is displayed.
After successful formatting the message
Repeat format (Y/N)
is displayed. You can format another disc straight away.
Description
Initialises discs with track and sector format. Clears the catalogue and verifies the sectoring.
Associated commands
*FORM80
Notes
*FORM80 is the same except that it formats the 80 track discs used in the dual drive system.
If you find that verification or formatting fails persistently it could be that either the discs you have are poor quality or that the disc drive needs servicing.
If you don't specify the drive number, the system will prompt with
Format which drive?
You can enter 0, 1, 2 or 3.

If you have a dual drive system you can format a disc in the second drive while the utilities disc remains in the first drive.
Fig 7 Formatting
The filing system utilities 67

68 The filing system utilities
*VERIFY (< drv>)
Purpose
Checks each sector of a disc for legibility. It is done automatically when you use the *FORM40 and *FORM80 commands.
Example
*VERIFY 1
verifies drive 1.
Description
Sector verification program.
Associated commands
*FORM40 *FORM80

8 Random access files
One of the major advantages of a disc over a cassette tape is that the read/ write head of the disc drive can be moved to a specific place on the disc quickly and accurately. Imagine you have a data file on cassette tape consisting of 'Names' and 'Telephone numbers'. To find a specific telephone number the file must be loaded and read from the beginning until the required record is found. If the file is long this will take some time. On the other hand, the Disc Filing System allows you to move to the required record and just read that one. Clearly this is much quicker.
To make this possible the Disc Filing System provides a pointer. The pointer points to a particular character in the file. It is the next character on the file to be read or written. In BASIC the pointer is controlled by the keyword PTR#. The other keywords in BASIC which are used in connection with disc files are EXT# and EOF#. EXT# tells you how long a file is, EOF# returns a value of TRUE (-1) if the end of file has been reached and FALSE (0) if not. All the BASIC keywords used to manipulate disc files are explained in the User Guide. They are:
OPENOUT OPENIN PTR # EXT # INPUT# PRINT# BGET# CLOSE# BPUT# EOF#
To prepare a file to receive data the OPENOUT keyword is used. In the User Guide the following example is given:
330 X=OPENOUT ("cinemas")
The effect of this line in a BASIC program is as follows:
1. If a file called 'cinemas' exists it is deleted.

70 Random access files
2. A file called 'cinemas' is entered on to the disc catalogue of the currently selected drive, in the current directory.
3. The filing system reserves 64 sectors (or the length of the previous file called 'cinemas' if there was one) on the disc for the exclusive use of the file ' cinemas'. If 64 sectors are not available, the file is not created and an error is produced.
4. Evaluating PTR# and EXT# at this point will reveal that they are both set to zero.
5. The filing system will have loaded into memory the first sector, 256 bytes of the file. This area of memory is specially reserved by the filing system for this purpose and is referred to as the 'buffer'.
Notice that the first action of the keyword OPENOUT is to delete any existing file of the specified name.
If there were no files on the disc previously, the effect can be illustrated as follows:
Nothing has been written on the file, so the value of EXT# (extent) is zero. We can now use the BASIC keyword PRINT# to write three cinema names
into these slots of ten characters each, as follows:
340 A = PTR#X
350 PRINT# X, "VICTORIA" 360 PTR#X = A+10
370 PRINT# X,"REGAL" 380 PTR# X = A+20
390 PRINT# X, "ODEON" 400 PTR# X = A+30

In practice you can do it much more elegantly than shown above. Nevertheless the result immediately after line 400 is:
Notice that the cinema names (in this illustration, VICTORIA) are in the file backwards. They are preceded by two bytes, represented in the diagram by 't' and 'l' . 't' specifies the type of data which follows. In this case the type is 'string' so the first byte will contain &00 in hex, as indicated in the table below.
't' = &00 = String type, followed by T, followed by the string.
't' = &40 = Integer type, followed by four bytes containing the integer.
't' = &FF = Real type, followed by five bytes containing the real number.
In our example the second byte, represented by 'l', gives the length of the string in hex. The integer and real number types are of fixed length as indicated above so they do not require the byte represented by 'l' to give the length. Real numbers are stored in exponential format, integers are stored with the high order bytes first in the file.
In the example we have used only the first 26 bytes of the file, so everything written to the file fits into the first sector which is in a 'buffer' in memory. If we had gone on writing names, the filing system would eventually have put the information in the memory buffer on to sector 02 of the disc and loaded sector 03 into the buffer to continue. This is still assuming that there are no other files on the disc, otherwise different sectors would be used. Remember that sectors 00 and 01 are reserved by the Disc Filing System for the disc catalogue. Clearly then, at the end of a sequence of writing actions, we are left with a buffer in memory which may be partly filled with information. We must make sure that this information is written to the disc. This is done with the C LOS E# keyword in BASIC. This empties the buffer and frees the channel on which we opened the file (X in the example).
Random access files 71

72 Random access files
We can now read the information back from the disc if we want to. OPENIN is the BASIC keyword used to do this, eg:
5 DIM cine$(3)
10 X = OPENIN("cinemas") 20 B = 1
30 FOR A = 0 TO 20 STEP 10 40 PTR#X = A
50 INPUT#X,cine$(B)
60 B = B+1
70 NEXT A
Line 10 of the example opens the file 'cinemas', loads the first sector into the buffer and sets PTR# to zero and EXT# to the length of the file.
Lines 30 to 50 of the example read each cinema name into an element of the array cine$, advancing the pointer to the start of the next name after reading each one. Now you can see why we stored each name in its own '10-byte record'. This makes it much easier to write a program to find the names again.
The important principle about using random access files is that you must keep track of where each item of information is written. You can then set PTR# to point to it again when you want to read or change it. The examples illustrate the basis of a very simple technique. There are a number of others which you can devise.
Note 1: As shown earlier in this discussion, OPENOUT reserves 64 sectors for a file. Other files opened may reserve sectors which immediately follow, eg:
X = OPENOUT ("cinemas") Y = OPENOUT ("clubs")
The statements reserve 128 sectors consecutively if the disc was otherwise empty. It may be that you require more than 64 sectors for the first

file 'cinemas'. If so, you will need to write 'dummy' records to the file to extend it to the required length before you open the second file, eg:
10 X = OPENOUT ("cinemas")
20 FOR A = 1 TO 200
30 PRINT#X, "DUMMY NAME FIELD"
40 PRINT#X, "DUMMY ADDRESS LINE ONE" 50 PRINT#X, "DUMMY ADDRESS LINE TWO" 60 PRINT#X, "ADDRESS LINE THREE"
70 PRINT#X, "POST CODE 123"
80 NEXT A
This program creates a file 79 sectors long with the dummy name and address written every 100 bytes.
By writing beyond the reserved area in this way you can effectively reserve as many sectors as you like. You can then open other files in the remaining space on the disc. EXT# will give the position of the '3' after the last dummy address on the file (20000).
The above method will only work consistently if you start with a blank, formatted disc. If you want to create a random access file larger than 64 sectors on a disc with other files already on it, there is another method.
First save the file with the name you want and with the number of bytes required. Use the address parameters of the *SAVE command to specify the number of bytes, eg:
*SAVE "DATA" 00000 08000
will create a file of 128 sectors (32K) called DATA. You can then open the file later in your program. The file will contain miscellaneous data which you can overwrite with the information you actually want. This second method causes the filing system to search the disc for a free space large enough to hold the file. Existing files will be skipped over if they would otherwise overlap with the new file.
Note 2: Up to five files may be open at any one time. This is because the space reserved for each file in the computer's memory to hold the information about extent, pointer etc is limited. In certain versions of the Disc Filing System, the commands *LOAD, *SAVE, *EXEC, *SPOOL, *BUILD, *LIST and *DUMP each use the space occupied by the information relating to one open file while they are active.
Random access files 73

9 Using the filing system in assembler
Section 43 of the new User Guide is essential reading for anyone wanting to write assembler programs on the BBC Microcomputer. Most of the necessary information for using the filing system in assembler is presented there. In this chapter the main points are summarised and a particular use of OSWORD is described in detail.
General principles
There are a number of routines available to handle disc I/O. All the routines must be called with a JSR and the decimal flag clear. It is important that you use these routines. They are called in address range &FF00 to &FFFF. They then call an internal (ROM resident) routine whose address is stored in RAM between &0200 and &02FF. The address here will vary according to the filing system in use. For example, the routine OSFIND to open or close a file is entered at &FFCE. It is indirected via &021C. &021C and &021D contain the address of the executable routine in the Disc Filing System ROM. You can intercept the call by changing the addresses in these RAM locations.
Using the disc files.
available routines you can perform all necessary functions relating to The relevant routines together with their entry points are as follows:
OSFIND OSARGS OSFILE OSBGET OSBPUT OSGBPB OSWORD
&FFCE FINDV &FFDA ARGSV &FFDD FILEV &FFD7 BGETV &FFD4 BPUTV &FFD1 GBPBV &FFF1 WORDV
&021C Open or close a file
&0214 Load or save data about a file &0212 Load or save a complete file
&0216 Read a single byte to A from the file &0218 Write a single byte from A to the file &021A Load or save a number of bytes &020C With A=&7F and a parameter block,
loads or saves a sector

OSFIND
Opens a file for writing or reading and writing. The routine is entered at &FFCE and indirects via &21C. The value in A determines the type of operation.
A=0 Causes a file or files to be closed
A=&40 Causes a file to be open for input (reading)
A=&80 Causes a file to be opened for output (writing)
A=&C0 Causes a file to be opened for input and output (random access)
If A=&40, &80 or &CO the Y (high byte) and X (low byte) must contain the address of locations in memory which contain the file name terminated with carriage return (&0D). On exit A will contain the channel number allocated to the file for all future operations. If A=0 on exit, then the operating system was unable to open the file.
If A=0 then a file, or all files, will be closed depending on the value of Y. Y=0 will close all files, otherwise the file whose channel number is given in Y will be closed.
On exit C, N, V and Z are undefined and D=0. The interrupt state is pre- served, but interrupts may be enabled during the operation.
OSARGS
This routine enables a file's attributes to be read from file or written to file. The routine is entered at &FFDA and indirects via &214. On entry, X must point to four locations in zero page and Y contains the channel number.
If Y is non-zero, then A will determine the function to be carried out on the file whose channel number is in Y.
A = 1
A = 0
A = 2
A = &FF
Write sequential pointer
Read sequential pointer
Read length
'Ensure' that this file is up to date on the media
If Y out.
is zero then the contents of A will determine the function to be carried
A=0 will return, in A, the type of file system in use. The value of A on exit has the following significance.
Using the filing system in assembler 75

76 Using the filing system in assembler
0 No file system
1 1200 baud cassette file system
2 300 baud cassette file system
3 ROM pack file system
4 Disc file system
5 Econet file system
6 Teletext/Prestel Telesoftware file system
A=1 will return the address of the rest of the command line in the zero page locations.
A=&FF will 'ensure' that all open files are up to date on the media.
On exit
X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved, but interrupts may be enabled during the operation.
OSFILE
This routine, by itself, allows a whole file to be loaded or saved. The routine is entered at &FFDD and indirects via &212.
On entry
A indicates the function to be performed. X and Y point to an 18-byte control block anywhere in memory. X contains the low byte of the control block address and Y the high byte. The control block is structured as follows from the base address given by X and Y.
OSFILE control block
 00 01
  Address of file name, which must be terminated by &0D
  LSB MSB
02 Load address of file LSB 03
04
05
  MSB

0A 0B 0C 0D
0E 0F 10 11
Start address of data for write operations LSB or length of file for read operations
MSB
End address of data, ie byte after LSB last byte of data to be written, or file attributes
MSB
Using the filing system in assembler 77
  06 07 08 09
  Execution address of file
  LSB
MSB
         The following table indicates the function performed by OSFILE for each value of A.
A=0 Save a section of memory as a named file. The file's catalogue information is also written
A=1 Write the catalogue information for the named file
A=2 Write the load address (only) for the named file
A=3 Write the execution address (only) for the named file
A=4 Write the attributes (only) for the named file
A=5 Read the named file's catalogue information; place the file type in A
A=6 Delete the named file
A=&FF Load the named file
When loading a file, the byte at XY+6 (the LSB of the execution address) determines where the file will be loaded in memory. If it is zero then the file will be loaded to the address given in the control block. If non-zero then the file will be loaded to the address stored with the file when it was created.
The file attributes are stored in four bytes. The least significant eight bits have the following meanings:
Bit Meaning
0 Not readable by you
1 Not writable by you

78 Using the filing system in assembler
2 Not executable by you
3 Not deletable by you
4 Not readable by others
5 Not writable by others
6 Not executable by others
7 Not deletable by others
File types are as follows:
0 Nothing found
1 File found
2 Directory found
A BRK will occur in the event of an error, and this can be trapped if required. On exit X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined and D=0. The
interrupt state is preserved, but interrupts may be enabled during the operation.
Read/write one byte
OSBGET call address &0FFD7 to get a byte. OSBPUT call address &0FFD4 to put a byte.
Y contains the channel number on which the file was opened using OSFIND. X is not used, but preserved.
A contains the byte to be put or receives the byte which is read.
The position in the file where the action of the GET or PUT takes place is determined by the position of the pointer as set by OSARGS.
On exit
C clear implies a successfully completed transfer.
C set implies end of file reached before completion of transfer.
Read/write a group of bytes
OSGBPB call address &0FFD1
This routine will write or read a byte (or group of bytes) to or from a specified open file. The option to read or write is determined by the value of A. The length of the data and its location are specified in a control block in memory.

On entry
X (low byte) and Y (high byte) point to the instruction block:
Offset
0
1
5
9
D
A determines the type of operation:
A = &01 Put byte using byte offset
A = &02 Put byte ignoring byte offset A = &03 Get byte using byte offset
A = &04 Get byte ignoring byte offset A = &05 Read title, option, drive
A = &06 Read current directory
A = &07 Read current library
A = &08 Read file names
This method is particularly useful in the environment of the Econet® file system, where the 'packaging overhead' for transferring small amounts of data is proportionately high.
On exit
A = 0 implies operation attempted.
A unchanged implies filing system does not support this facility. C clear implies a successfully completed transfer.
C set implies end of file reached before completion of transfer. The number of bytes and byte offset (if used) are modified to show how much data has been transferred (usually as much as was asked for) and the new pointer value is the old pointer plus the amount transferred.
A= &01 to &04
The number of bytes is modified to show how much data has not been transferred (usually zero). The pointer value is updated (ie old pointer Econet is a trademark of Acorn Computers Limited.
Using the filing system in assembler 79

80 Using the filing system in assembler
plus the amount transferred), and the offset is set to its current value.
A = &05
This returns in the area pointed at by the pointer the title, option and drive of the currently selected disc. It is returned in this form:
<title length><title><option><drive>
The cycle number, option and drive are single binary bytes.
A = &06
This returns the currently selected directory. It is returned in this form:
<length of disc name><disc name><length of directory name> <directory name>
A = &07
This returns the currently selected library. It is returned in this form:
<length of disc name><disc name><length of library name> <library name>
A = &08
This returns the files in the current directory. The format of the control block is similar to that for sequential files:
Offset
0
1
5
9
D
If the pointer is set to zero, the search will begin with the first file. All are updated in a similar manner to the way pointers are updated for A=&01 to &04. The format of the file names is as follows:
<length of filename 1><filename 1><length of filename 2> <filename 2> .. .

Read/write a sector
OSWORD with A =&7F Call address at &FFF1
A=&7F indicates that a general read/write operation is required.
On entry X (low byte) and Y (high byte) point to the instruction block:
Offset
0
1-4
5
6
7 onwards
Example:
Number of parameters = 3
Command =&53 to read or &4B to write
Parameter 1 = Parameter 2 = Parameter 3 =
On exit
Track number
Sector number
&21 (specifies sector length of 256 bytes and 1 to be
acted upon)
0 in the last parameter address +1 indicates a successful transfer. A failure is indicated by a disc error number.
Using the filing system in assembler 81

10 Changing filing systems
Your computer can have several filing systems available other than the Disc Filing System. The following commands are all used to exit from the current filing system into the one named.
*TAPE3 300 baud cassette
*TAPE12 1200 baud cassette
*TAPE 1200 baud cassette
*NET Econet filing system
*TELESOFT The Prestel and Teletext system
*ROM The cartridge ROM system
*DISC Enters the filing system from one of the others *DISK Alternative spelling for above
Typing the command to enter the system you are already in has no effect.

11 Error messages
&BD Not enabled
An attempt is made to use a restricted command without typing *ENABLE immediately preceding it.
&BE Cat full
The catalogue has enough space for 31 files. This error is produced if you attempt to enter more than 31.
&BF Can't extend
An attempt is made to extend a random access file when there is insufficient space immediately after it to do so.
&CO Too many open
This error occurs on attempting to open a sixth random access file. Five is the maximum allowed at once.
&C1 Read only
This error occurs if you try to write to a file opened for reading only, using OSFIND with A=&40.
&C2 Open
This error occurs if you attempt to open a file which is already open. An intervening CLOSE is required between two OPENs referring to the same file. This error is also produced if you try to delete an open file with the commands: *DELETE, *SAVE, *BUILD etc.
&C3 Locked
Access to the named file is locked. This error message is displayed when any attempt is made to overwrite or write to a locked file.
&C4 Exists
This occurs if you try to rename a file with an existing file name.
&C5 Drive fault
This error means that the disc drive is probably faulty and needs attention.

84 Error messages
&C6 Disk full
This indicates that there is not enough space on the disc to open (OPENOUT# ) or save a file of the specified size.
&C7 Disk fault
If this error message occurs it means that the computer cannot read the disc. It implies that the disc is damaged, faulty, unformatted or of the wrong type, like an 80 track disc in a 40 track drive.
&C8 Disk changed
This error occurs if the computer detects that a disc has been changed while files on it are still open.
&C9 Disk read only
This error occurs if you attempt to write to a disc which has the write- protection notch covered.
&CB Bad option
There are currently two 'option' commands *OPT1 and *OPT4. The error occurs if you type anything else besides 1 and 4 after *OPT.
&CC Bad name
This message appears if you enter a file name which is invalid, such as: longer than seven characters, or a blank file name, or control characters.
&CD Bad drive
This error means that the : (dry) part of the file specification was incorrect, eg ' :' colon missing or drive number out of range 0 to 3.
&CE Bad dir
Means that the specified directory is not allowed, eg more than one character.
&CF Bad attribute
This error occurs if you use anything other than the letter 'L' with the *ACCESS command.
&D6 Not found
The Disc Filing System could not find the named file in the specified drive/directories.

&DC Syntax
You have typed in a command with bad arguments such as *COPY RETURN. The error message includes the correct syntax.
&FE Bad command
This means that * was ommitted or that the command name was not recognised as a Disc Filing System command or utility.
Error messages 85

12 Technical information
18-bit addressing
The BBC Disc Filing System uses 18-bit addressing giving a range from &00000 to &3FFFF. This means that two bytes and two bits are required to store a complete address, like this:
&3FFFF is 11 1111 1111 High Middle
bits bits
1111 1111 in binary Low
bits
Each full address therefore consists of high, middle and low order bits. This is important to note, because the bits of the address are not always stored consecutively in the catalogue. This is clearly shown by the way that the disc catalogue is loaded into memory.
Another important factor concerns the use of a second processor. If the top two bits of an address are set, eg: &3----, the address is assumed to refer to the I/O processor.
Disc catalogue
Sectors 00 and 01 on the disc are reserved for the catalogue. The format of the catalogue is as follows:
Sector 00
&00 to &07
&08 to &0E &0F
&10 to &1E &1F
First eight bytes of the 13-byte disc title
First file name
Directory of first file name Second file name
Directory of second file name . . . .
. . and so on Repeated up to 31 files.

Sector 01
&00 to &03 &04
&05
&06 (bits 0,1)
(bits 4,5)
&07
&08
&09
&OA
&0B
&0C
&0D
&0E (bits 0,1)
(bits 2,3) (bits 4,5) (bits 6,7)
&0F
Repeated for up to 31 files.
Note that the first eight bytes in each sector contain miscellaneous information about the disc. Each subsequent block of eight bytes contains information about the files, repeated for up to 31 files. The complete information about file 3 would be found in the fourth block of eight bytes on sector 00 followed by the fourth block of eight bytes on sector 01.
File system initialise and !BOOT
On pressing BREAK , the MOS (Machine Operating System) seeks and initialises a filing system. It starts with the service ROM closest to the edge of the main printed circuit board. The first one will be initialised if just BREAK was pressed.
If another key is held down while you press BREAK , the first file system which recognises the key will be initialised. If none recognises the key, the CFS (cassette filing system) is initialised.
Last four bytes of the disc title
Sequence number
The number of catalogue entries multiplied by 8
Number of sectors on disc (two high order bits of 10 bit number)
!BOOT start-up option
Number of sectors on disc (eight low order bits of 10 bit number)
First file's load address, low order bits
First file's load address, middle order bits
First file's exec address, low order bits
First file's exec address, middle order bits
First file's length in bytes, low order bits
First file's length in bytes, middle order bits
First file's start sector, two high order bits of 10 bit number
First file's load address, high order bits
First file's length in bytes, high order bits
First file's exec address, high order bits
First file's start sector, eight low order bits of 10 bit number
. . . and so on
Technical information 87

88 Technical information
Havin initialised a filing system, if 'link 5' is unmade (see below) or if SHIFT is not pressed and 'link 5' is made, then the start-up option of any associated device is examined. For options 1 to 3, the Disc Filing System will search for a file named !BOOT on the device and act according to the start-up option set.
In the case of the cassette filing system the start-up option of the ROM cartridge is examined as no start-up options are provided on cassette tapes.
Link facilities
Under the top cover of the computer to the right of the space bar, you will find eight pairs of holes in the circuit board. These are provided for the fitting of links, and give you some extra facilities, described in detail below. In the following tables, a zero means that a link is not made, and a one means that a link is made.
Links 1 and 2
Reserved for future expansion.
Links 3 and 4
The table below shows the optimum link settings for different types of disc drives which may be used with the BBC Microcomputer.
 Drive type
Tandon 80 track
Tandon 40 track, Shugart
Teac, Mitsubishi, Olivetti 80 track, Siemens 211, 221, YD280
Olivetti 40 track, Shugart SA200, BASF 6106
Step Settle Headload Links 3 and 4
4mS 16mS0 1 1
6mS 16mS0 1 0
6ms 16mS 56
24mS 20mS 64
0 1
0 0*
If you are using a drive other than those listed above, then obtain the drive speed specification from your supplier. Set the links so that each parameter is greater than or equal to the specification given. After changing the link settings, press CTRL BREAK to simulate a power down reset.

If in doubt, run at the slowest speeds (marked with an asterisk in the above list).
Link 5
See the previous section called 'File system initialise and !BOOT'.
Links 6, 7 and 8
These determine what screen mode the computer starts up in after a cold start ( see the BBC Microcomputer User Guide).
Screen mode
Mode 7 Mode 6 Mode 5 Mode 4 Mode 3 Mode 2 Mode 1
Links 6,
0 0 0 0 1 1 1
7 and 8
00 01 10 11 00 01 10
Technical information 89

13 Filing system
command summary
Command Abbreviation
*ACCESS (*A) *BACKUP (*BAC.)
*BUILD (*BU.)
*CAT (*•) *COMPACT (*COM)
*COPY (*COP.)
*DELETE (*DE.) *DESTROY (*DES.)
*DIR (*DI.) *DRIVE (*DR.) *DUMP (*DU.)
*ENABLE (*EN.)
*EXEC (*E.)
*HELP (*H.) *INFO (*I.)
Locks or unlocks a file
Copies all information from one disc to another
Causes all subsequent keyboard entries to be stored in the named file
Displays a disc catalogue
Collects all files on a disc together into one contiguous sequence leaving a single block of free space
Copies all specified files from one disc to another
Removes a single named file from the disc
Removes specified files from a disc in a single action
Changes the current set directory
Changes the current set drive
Produces a hexadecimal listing of a file
Allows the use of *BACKUP and *DESTROY
Reads a disc file byte by byte as if the byte were being typed on the keyboard
Displays the file system commands with syntax guidelines
Displays information about specified files

*LIB none *LIST none
*LOAD (*L.) *OPT1 (*O.1)
*OPT4 (*0.4)
*RENAME (*RE.) *RUN (*R.) *SAVE (*S.)
*SPOOL (*SP.)
*TITLE (*TI.) *TYPE (*TY.)
*WIPE (*W.)
Selects the drive/directory for the library
Displays text file on the screen with line numbers
Reads a file from disc to memory
Switches the screen messages which accompany disc accesses on or off
Specifies the auto-start option of a disc, relating to a file named :0/.$.!BOOT
Changes a file name
Runs a machine-code program
Saves a specific part of memory to the disc
Transfers all text subsequently dis- played on the screen into a specified file
Changes the title of a disc
Displays a text file on screen with line numbers
Removes specified files from the disc after confirmation for each file meeting the given specification